---
title: "The Mutagenic Effect of Recombination in Maize"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2012-03-01-talk-1
venue: "Maize Genetics Conference"
date: 2023-05-10
slidesurl: 'http://16nikita.github.io/files/Maize_meeting_presentation.pdf'
location: "St. Louis, MO."
---

This poster outlined findings from my undergraduate thesis, highlighting recombination hotspots and InDel generation using machine learning approaches.

**Abstract:** The processes occurring during meiotic recombination, from the initiation of
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) to the completion of crossing-over (CO)
formation, have numerous opportunities for inaccuracy. In particular, several
types of missteps during recombination, including the formation of double
DSBs, could lead to genome deletions. To explore this phenomenon in maize,
we examined the occurrence of indels at recombination sites. To do it, we
mapped indels to meiotic DSB hotspots and CO sites and measured the
presence and degree of enrichment of indels of different sizes. We assessed
the indel generation potential of meiotic recombination by calculating three
measures: indel overlap by recombination sites, recombination site overlap
by indels, and indel density at recombination sites. We found substantial
enrichment of small indels (1-50 bp) at CO sites, providing the first strong
evidence of mutagenicity of meiotic recombination in plants. Small indel
density decreased in regions 2 kb upstream and downstream from the
recombination sites, implying that the indels were generated in a localized
fashion. Indels have the potential to alter gene function and plant
phenotype, marking their importance as a source of genetic diversity. Thus.
understanding mechanisms of indel origination and their relationship to the
recombination mechanism is important for efforts that exploit genetic
diversity for crop improvement.

[📄 View Poster (PDF)](http://16nikita.github.io/files/Maize_meeting_presentation.pdf)
